📖 documentation for `clusterctl alpha topology plan` (#6009)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/clusterctl/commands/alpha-topology-plan.md

objects that will be created, updated and deleted of a target cluster.

This command can be used with and without a management cluster. In case the command is used without a management cluster the input should have
all the objects needed to perform the dry run. In case the command is run with a management cluster the dry run operation will look for objects 
in the real cluster as needed.

```shell
clusterctl alpha topology plan -f input.yaml -o output/
```

> Note: This command can be used with or without a management cluster. In case the command is used without a management cluster the input should have
> all the objects needed to perform the dry run. In case the command is run with a management cluster the dry run operation will look for objects 
> in the management cluster as needed.

## Dry run

The operation is composed of the following steps:
* Set the namespace on objects in the input with missing namespace.
* Run the Defaulting and Validation webhooks on the Cluster and ClusterClass objects in the input.
* Dry run the topology reconciler on the target cluster.
* Capture all changes observed during reconciliation.

<aside class="note">

> <h1>Set missing namespace</h1>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<h1>Handling of unset namespaces</h1>
```
nit, up to you

The namespace used for objects with missing namespace follows this precedence order:
* Value passed using `--namespace`
* Current namespace defined in kubeconfig
* Value `default`

</aside>

<aside class="note warning">

<h1>Defaulting and Validation of objects</h1>

Defaulting and validation is only performed on the Cluster and ClusterClass objects in the input. Objects of all other kinds in the input should 

> be fully valid and any required default values should be set. Missing values will not be defaulted.

Reviewer: Should we add the tip that users can also apply those YAMLs if they have a mgmt cluster and then use the resulting objects as input for the command? (either by getting them or just using them directly from the cluster)

Author: I see your point. However, suggesting users to apply the YAMLs doesn't fit will here as the whole idea of the command is that users can try stuff without actually applying any changes to the real cluster.

Reviewer: Yup makes sense

> 

Reviewer: Should we also add a more detailed example somewhere in the doc what kind of diffs are expected because of this? (there are actually two variants of that issue)

From my notes:
```
Essentially we have the following cases:
    * diff regarding reconciled objects of the topology:
        * includes diff between the desired object and the desired object after server-side defaulting (e.g. KCP). In that case e.g. the diff shows that kubeadmConfigSpec.format and rolloutStrategy.rollingUpdate will be deleted.
    * diff regarding templates of the ClusterClass
        * Defaulting on templates referenced in the ClusterClass can lead to diffs shown by topology run
```

It's just that for me that's the one big caveat that can confuse users even if they do everything right with the input files (i.e. all defaults are there and correct)

Reviewer: But let's please get consensus on that point first before adding anything
@fabriziopandini wdyt?

> **Note on Validation**: If the command is used with a real management cluster, objects from the management cluster will be used to perform 
> `ValidateUpdate` appropriately.

</aside>

## Input

> ### `--file`, `-f` (REQUIRED)

Reviewer: Should we mention that there could be multiple?
Absolutely up to you, we don't have to.

Author: I am inclined to keeping it simple here. Users who might be interested in using multiple files can quickly figure out that it is supported by running `clusterctl alpha topology plan --help`. The flag will show up as `-f, --file stringArray`.

 
The input file with the target changes.
The objects in the input should follow these rules:
* All the objects in the input should belong to the same namespace.
* Should not have multiple Clusters.
* Should not have multiple ClusterClasses.

<aside class="note warning">

<h1>Object namespaces</h1>

> If some of the objects have a defined namespace and some do not, the objects are considered as belonging to different namespaces. The input
> will be considered as invalid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If some of the objects have a defined namespace and some do not, the objects are considered as belonging to different namespaces which is not allowed.
```
nit

Author: I think it would be good to highlight this to disambiguate users from cases where only a subset of objects have a namespace defined and it matches the default namespace (from `--namespace` or kubeconfig).

</aside>

### `--output-directory`, `-o` (REQUIRED)

> Information about the objects that are created and updated during dry run are written to this directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Informations about the objects that are created and updated during dry run are written to this directory.
```
I think

Author: I believe plural of information is just information.

### `--cluster`, `-c` (Optional)

When multiple clusters are affected by the input, `--cluster` can be used to specify a target cluster. 

If only one cluster is affected or if a Cluster is in the input it defaults as the target cluster. 

### `--namespace`, `-n` (Optional)

Namespace used for objects with missing namespaces in the input.

## Example use cases
 
### Creating a new Cluster using a new ClusterClass

The command can be used to dry run creating a new Cluster along with a new ClusterClass.
```shell

> clusterctl alpha topology plan -f new-cluster-and-class.yaml -o output/

Reviewer: nit, up to you. Could be a good place to just show implicitly that you can use multiple `-f` args, e.g.
`-f cluster.yaml -f clusterclass.yaml`. 
I also assume usually users would store those in separate files whenever possible (as you ideally have a ~ 1:n relationship between a ClusterClass and Cluster)

  default    DockerMachineTemplate  new-cluster-md-0-infra-4nv62      created   
  default    DockerMachineTemplate  new-cluster-md-1-infra-dcfnj      created   
  default    KubeadmConfigTemplate  new-cluster-md-0-bootstrap-kk24t  created   
  default    KubeadmConfigTemplate  new-cluster-md-1-bootstrap-k6xw4  created   
  default    KubeadmControlPlane    new-cluster-dtdvx                 created   
  default    MachineDeployment      new-cluster-md-0-z9v9f            created   
  default    MachineDeployment      new-cluster-md-1-xjtg2            created   
  default    Secret                 new-cluster-shim                  created   
  default    Cluster                new-cluster                       modified  

Created objects are written to directory "output/created"
Modified objects are written to directory "output/modified"

```

The final state of objects that are created and updated are written to disk under the `output` folder. For objects that are modified the following
files are written to disk:
* Original object
* Final object
* JSON patch between the original and the final object
* Diff of the original and final objects

> The contents fn the output directory is similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The content of the output directory is similar to this:
```

```
output
├── created
│   ├── DockerCluster_default_new-cluster-jfjcs.yaml
│   ├── DockerMachineTemplate_default_new-cluster-control-plane-6rkg8.yaml
│   ├── DockerMachineTemplate_default_new-cluster-md-0-infra-4nv62.yaml
│   ├── DockerMachineTemplate_default_new-cluster-md-1-infra-dcfnj.yaml
│   ├── KubeadmConfigTemplate_default_new-cluster-md-0-bootstrap-kk24t.yaml
│   ├── KubeadmConfigTemplate_default_new-cluster-md-1-bootstrap-k6xw4.yaml
│   ├── KubeadmControlPlane_default_new-cluster-dtdvx.yaml
│   ├── MachineDeployment_default_new-cluster-md-0-z9v9f.yaml
│   ├── MachineDeployment_default_new-cluster-md-1-xjtg2.yaml
│   └── Secret_default_new-cluster-shim.yaml
└── modified
    ├── Cluster_default_new-cluster.diff
    ├── Cluster_default_new-cluster.jsonpatch
    ├── Cluster_default_new-cluster.modified.yaml
    └── Cluster_default_new-cluster.original.yaml
```

> ### Modifying a ClusterClass that affects multiple Clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Testing the effects of changing a ClusterClass
When planning for a change on a ClusterClass you might want to understand what effects the change will have on the existing clusters.

```

```shell

> clusterctl alpha topology plan -f modified-first-cluster-class.yaml -o output/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clusterctl alpha topology plan -f modified-cluster-class.yaml -o output/
```
nit, I think for the purpose of this doc this is slightly better (I would also drop the first in the clusterclass name in the output)

Reviewer 2: Also in this case, let's link to the example, and document what is expected to be in the file

```
When multiple clusters are affected, only the list of Clusters and ClusterClasses is presented.
```shell
Detected a cluster with Cluster API installed. Will use it to fetch missing objects.
The following ClusterClasses will be affected by the changes:
 ＊ default/first-cluster-class

The following Clusters will be affected by the changes:
 ＊ default/first-cluster
 ＊ default/second-cluster

No target cluster identified. Use --cluster to specify a target cluster to get detailed changes.
```

To get the full list of changes for the "first-cluster":
```shell
clusterctl alpha topology plan -f modified-first-cluster-class.yaml -o output/ -c "first-cluster"

> ```

Reviewer 2: Let's add something about the output being the same as above

        replicas: 1
```
</details>

Produces an output similar to this:
```shell
Detected a cluster with Cluster API installed. Will use it to fetch missing objects.
No ClusterClasses will be affected by the changes.
The following Clusters will be affected by the changes:
 ＊ default/example-cluster

Changes for Cluster "default/example-cluster": 

  NAMESPACE  KIND                 NAME                        ACTION    
  default    KubeadmControlPlane  example-cluster-l7kx8       modified  
  default    MachineDeployment    example-cluster-md-0-j58ln  modified  

Modified objects are written to directory "output/modified"
```

### Rebase a Cluster to a different ClusterClass

The command can be used to plan if a Cluster can be successfully rebased to a different ClusterClass.

Rebasing a Cluster to a different ClusterClass:
```shell
# Rebasing from `example-cluster-class` to `another-cluster-class`.
clusterctl alpha topology plan -f rebase-example-cluster.yaml -o output/
```
The `example-cluster` Cluster is rebased from `example-cluster-class` to `another-cluster-class`. In this example `another-cluster-class` is assumed to be available in the management cluster.

> 

Reviewer: Q: Should we provide the `another-cluster-class.yaml` here to?

Mainly asking because everything else was provided except that file.

Author: Did not provide that on purpose. `another-cluster-class` could be both a compatible and compatible cluster class. Hence I provided 2 sample output - one for compatible and another for incompatible.

Reviewer: Okay, got it

    class: another-cluster-class
    version: v1.21.2
    controlPlane:
      metadata: {}
      replicas: 1
    workers:
      machineDeployments:
      - class: "default-worker"
        name: "md-0"
        replicas: 1
```
</details>

If the target ClusterClass is compatible with the original ClusterClass the output be similar to:
```shell
Detected a cluster with Cluster API installed. Will use it to fetch missing objects.
No ClusterClasses will be affected by the changes.
The following Clusters will be affected by the changes:
 ＊ default/example-cluster

Changes for Cluster "default/example-cluster": 

  NAMESPACE  KIND                   NAME                                  ACTION    
  default    DockerCluster          example-cluster-7t7pl                 modified  
  default    DockerMachineTemplate  example-cluster-control-plane-lt6kw   modified  
  default    DockerMachineTemplate  example-cluster-md-0-infra-cjxs4      modified  
  default    KubeadmConfigTemplate  example-cluster-md-0-bootstrap-m9sg8  modified  
  default    KubeadmControlPlane    example-cluster-l7kx8                 modified  

Modified objects are written to directory "output/modified"
```

> Instead, if the command detects that the rebase operation will lead to a non-functional cluster (ClusterClasses are incompatible), the output will be similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, if the command detects that the rebase operation would lead to a non-functional cluster (ClusterClasses are incompatible), the output will be similar to:
```

```shell
Detected a cluster with Cluster API installed. Will use it to fetch missing objects.
Error: failed defaulting and validation on input objects: failed to run defaulting and validation on Clusters: failed validation of cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1, Kind=Cluster default/example-cluster: Cluster.cluster.x-k8s.io "example-cluster" is invalid: spec.topology.workers.machineDeployments[0].class: Invalid value: "default-worker": MachineDeploymentClass with name "default-worker" does not exist in ClusterClass "another-cluster-class"
```
In this example rebasing will lead to a non-functional Cluster because the ClusterClass is missing a worker class that is used by the Cluster.

> ### Testing the affects of changing a ClusterClass

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing the effects of changing a ClusterClass
```

```shell
clusterctl alpha topology plan -f modified-first-cluster-class.yaml -o output/
```
When multiple clusters are affected, only the list of Clusters and ClusterClasses is presented.
```shell
Detected a cluster with Cluster API installed. Will use it to fetch missing objects.
The following ClusterClasses will be affected by the changes:
 ＊ default/first-cluster-class

The following Clusters will be affected by the changes:
 ＊ default/first-cluster
 ＊ default/second-cluster

No target cluster identified. Use --cluster to specify a target cluster to get detailed changes.
```

To get the full list of changes for the "first-cluster":
```shell
clusterctl alpha topology plan -f modified-first-cluster-class.yaml -o output/ -c "first-cluster"
```
Output will be similar to the full summary output provided in other examples.

## Reference

The topology plan operation is composed of the following steps:
* Set the namespace on objects in the input with missing namespace.
* Run the Defaulting and Validation webhooks on the Cluster and ClusterClass objects in the input.
* Dry run the topology reconciler on the target cluster.

> * Capture all changes observed during reconciliation.

Reviewer: This seems to be a bit out of place directly below Reference without any headline / context.

I would suggest to add a headline like "### How does topology plan work"

> ## Input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Flags
```
Should this be flags?

Reviewer: and should probably be one layer deeper nested "###"
(assuming it's meant to be below Reference)

Author: Will rename 'Reference' to 'How does topology plan work?' and will rename 'Input' to 'Reference'. With this, the two sections should then live at the same level.
